"Evaluating the Contribution of Asset Classes in the Risk Reduction of Financial Portfolios"

Asesor: Martín Carlos Lozano Banda
By: Víctor Arnulfo González Campos #361401, Fernando Chapa Guzmán #363727, Montserrat González Cantú #364489, Carolina Villarreal Chaccourt #553071

“But divide your investments among many places, for you do not know what risks might lie ahead.” (Ecclesiastes)

#Background
  In 1952, the Modern Portfolio Theory or MPT was introduced by Harry Markowitz and this served as the foundation for portfolio management for many years to come 
because of what it brings to the finance industry. Using the proposed model, managers or investors are able to efficiently allocate their assets in such a way that,
given a level of risk (return), the return (risk) is maximized (minimized) through portfolio diversification using historical market data, meaning that the 
securities used to construct a portfolio will depend upon their average return (expected return) from previous data as well as the variance (risk) of said returns. 
This allows economic agents to satisfy their needs depending on their profile as investors and thus maximizing their utility. 
  The Modern Portfolio Theory seeks to reduce market risk as much as possible, it does not concern itself with specific or idiosyncratic risk because it will be 
diversified away once a certain level of portfolio diversification is reached. In 1973, Jack Treynor and Fischer Black published “How to Use Security Analysis to 
Improve Portfolio Selection”. In this article they argue that portfolios have two sources of risk: market and specific (appraisal) risks and it is not correct to 
assume that optimal balancing implies having negligible levels of either. Optimal portfolios have two parts: a portfolio formed with specific securities that yield 
independent returns (derived from specific risk) and certain exposure to market risk; and an approximation to the market portfolio; the first component is known as 
the active portfolio and it is the focus of this article. Given that optimal selection in the active portfolio depends on the independent component of risk and 
returns when the appraisal premium (the compensation for incurring specific risk) is zero, then the resulting portfolio will be an approximation of the market 
portfolio. “Portfolio selection can be thought of as a three-stage process, in which the first stage is the selection of an active portfolio to maximize the 
appraisal ratio, the second is blending the active portfolio with a suitable replica of the market portfolio to maximize the Sharpe ratio, and the third entails 
scaling positions in the combined portfolio up or down through lending or borrowing while preserving their proportions” (Black & Treynor, 1973). 

  Since the 90’s, Value-at-Risk (VaR) has been used to measure market risk in portfolios. In 1998 Banks started using proprietary VaR measures to calculate regulatory
capital requirements. (Holton, G. 2002). The definition of VaR according to (Philippe, 2001) is that it is  “a measure of market risk. it’s the maximum loss which 
can occur with x% confidence over a holding period of t days.”  VaR, is essentially an estimate of how much exposure an amount of cash has on a certain asset. 
VaR cannot be the only reliability of a measure of risk because it is based on probabilities, with a reflection on a level of confidence selected by the investor 
ahead of time. It is also stated that the greater the volatility, the higher the probability of loss. The development of VaR has the sole purpose of incorporating 
covariances between risk factors to reflect hedging and diversification in a portfolio. Markowitz in 1952 identified the issues related to the subjectivity of 
risk. Nevertheless only time will tell if the use of VaR contributes to the risk that it intends to measure.

  The Post Modern Portfolio Theory (PMPT) has a more extensive application than the MPT, which includes the investor's expectations related to a minimum return rate 
rather than the rate of average return. According to Geambasu, “The risk in the post-modern portfolio theory is considered as the possibility of return rates to be 
situated beneath the minimum expected return; investors are preoccupied mostly to limit this kind of variation from their investment.” (Geambasu, 2010). 
  The PMPT was developed with the intention of adapting the MPT to the market reality, which includes the minimum return rate that the investor accepts in the 
measurement of risk. This theory does not include any restrictions in the data distribution, this means that the distribution can have any form. An important factor
is that PMPT allows different models to be adequate to reality in portfolio management, in other words, investors have the power of representing an economic reality
if applying this theory.
  According to an investigation made by Geambasu, “The PMPT covers the lack of flexibility and adaptiveness of the MPT, by measuring the risk with consideration to 
the investors requirements.” (Geambasu, 2010). It's important to say that comparing the MPT with the PMPT, we can  say that the PMPT is more flexible and there are 
more risk measurement applications. The investors have a minimum expected return rate and a certain amount of risk they are willing to take, that is why PMPT 
measures this risk with the economic reality in order to form portfolios that are adequate for the investor.

  In 1986 Brison research stated that the asset allocation policy determines 90 percent of the portfolio performance and that the timing of the market fails to add 
value to the portfolio creating fat tails and bad practices, and given a large historical equity risk premium the asset allocation policy was created in the 
financial planning community. This policy believes that stocks are less risky than bonds in the long run, and that portfolio returns are mainly determined by this 
policy and a random draw from a known distribution of asset class returns. 
  The speculation that historical returns provide an acceptable basis for projecting asset class return is false, the reason being that many economic factors create
an impact on the returns to be uncertain and ever-changing in the real world,  creating uncertainty in the investors on not meeting their financial objectives. 
According to Markowitz, the historical returns are of little or not valuable in creating return expectations, standards deviations and correlations, he stated: 
"When the past performance of securities are used as inputs the of securities are used as inputs, the outputs of the analysis are portfolios which performed 
particularly well in the past. When beliefs of security analysts are used as inputs, the outputs of the analysis are the implications of these beliefs for better 
or worse portfolios." (Markowitz, 1952).  
  A list of researchers (Markowitz, Brinson, Jahnke), challenged the practice for concluding the historical equity risk premium on different grounds, including that
it´s too relative to the variability of stock returns for investment horizons longer than a year. That the premium reflects an adjective of the market´s 
price/earnings ratio, which is not expected to continue; other factors such as diminishing earnings growth due to excess capacity, global competition, allocation 
of options, and under-funding of pension and medical benefits in society. Assuming that the historical risk premium is a bad practice whether or not it is adjusted
in the price/earnings ratio. 
  The uncertainty and financial stress has seen volatility across all the markets, mostly in the equity markets, high volatility is nothing new but there have been
financial crises in periods such as; 1929, 1987, 1998, 2002 and 2008, that had a major impact in the markets.  
  A high volatility period can be defined as a 12-month standard deviation above 5%, which occurred in all periods mentioned above; these peaks lasted for several 
months. Such uncertainty and high volatility periods made the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) develop the first version of the Volatility Index, also known 
as VIX, in 1993. With the objective to measure the stock market volatility. The index was calculated by taking the weighted average of implied volatility for calls 
and puts from the S&P 100 Index (OEX).
  In 2003 came the next revision, which gave a more accurate representation of the market volatility by using options on the S&P 500. This calculation is independent 
of the theoretical pricing models, using the weighted prices of At The Money (ATM) and Out of The Money (OTM) puts and calls to analyse expected volatility.  
“Although the VIX is often called the fear index, a high VIX isn't necessarily bearish for stocks. Instead, the VIX is a measure of fear of volatility in either 
direction, including to the upside. High VIX readings mean investors see significant risk that the market will move sharply, whether downward or upward.” (Ruggiero Jr., M.A., 2008). 
Basically, the high VIX readings happen when investors suppose massive moves in either direction, and the low VIX when investors assume neither significant 
downside risk nor significant upside potential. Low VIX values are between 20 and 25, these values often occur when the market is uninterested, leading to a market
selloff, values above 30 are known as bullish.

  In 2016, Butler et al. proposed an allocation model that combines momentum with a minimum variance portfolio to trade a diverse array of global asset classes named,
Adaptive Asset Allocation model. AAA is motivated by the consideration that investors often use long-term average asset returns and risks to establish optimal 
portfolios, but the long term estimates are subject to large error in the intermediate term. The small errors in portfolios established using MPT can lead to large 
errors, whereas AAA relies on a short-term rolling estimate of risk, diversification and returns that change throughout the observed time in response to the 
changes in the markets and then delivers more resilient portfolios. Then, the portfolio is updated periodically, and it only holds onto the assets that are 
expected to have the best performance based on momentum, followed by the selected weights of the selected assets are then computed as those that minimise the 
volatility of the portfolio. Butler et. al proved in the paper that AAA markedly outperforms naïve diversification strategy in terms of both risk and return. 

  In 2019, Florian Methling and Rudiger von Nitzsch published a paper called “Naive Diversification in thematic investing: heuristics for the core satellite investor”,
where they discovered that a portfolio based in the naive diversification strategy with the development of stock based naive diversification has a sa result a 
reduction in the volatility during a period of time. In this investigation, they created a portfolio where the 65.92% of the cases perceived less volatility, 
which was reduced even more with the concentration based diversification.

  In 2020, an alternative version of the Adaptive Asset Allocation model was developed by Mirko Bellu and Claudio Conversano and it is known as Protected Adaptive 
Asset Allocation or PAAA. This alternative offers the investor additional protection during negative markets by introducing a cash protection feature; when an 
asset shows unfavorable momentum it will be replaced by more liquid alternatives such as cash. The results of this method will be discussed in the literature 
review section. 

  Eom et.al. (2021) state that there are limitations regarding the portfolio diversification because, despite the increased number of stocks, agents are still 
susceptible to extreme losses that occur during high volatility periods. Their findings suggest managers and investors increase their tail risk the more stocks 
they include in their portfolio, casting doubts on the usefulness of modern portfolio theory. Through the analysis of the tails of return distributions, they 
suggest that the left tail of said distributions increases with the number of stocks, while the right tail decreases; this effectively means that investors are 
giving away potential extreme high returns and become more prone to extreme negative returns. “Portfolio diversification does not give a balanced trade-off 
relationship between loss avoidance and profit sacrifice, contrary to the expectations of investors.” (Eom, Kaizoji, Livan & Scalas, 2021). The authors suggest the 
use of safe haven assets to reduce the exposure to tail risk, as well as having control over the covariance and correlation matrices of the returns.

#Research Problem
  Nowadays, the traditional asset allocation theories such as the Modern Portfolio Theory do not generate portfolios that provide stability and performance under 
high volatility periods, causing economic agents that invested in financial instruments to incur negative returns in the United States Stock Market. 

#Hypothesis
  By quantifying the contribution of five different asset classes and using the Protected Adaptive Asset Allocation model, it will be possible to create a portfolio 
that has less exposure to downside risk in comparison with an equally weighted portfolio and a Mean-Variance MPT portfolio. 

#General Objective
  To construct an automated portfolio that improves upon the MPT by having lower tail risk using PAAA and five different asset classes in order to offer reduced 
drawdowns under high volatility periods and deliver more consistent and predictable returns. 

#Specific Objectives
1. To evaluate the financial instruments from each asset class and select the highest performing ones based on financial analysis. 
2. To estimate VaR and Expected Shortfall using EWMA models when including each individual instrument from the different asset classes. 
3. To quantify the portfolio performance given the addition of each asset class. 
4. To test the proposed portfolio under turbulent market conditions and compare it with MPT and equally weighted portfolios. 

#Literature Review
Mirko Bellu and Claudio Conversano (2020) developed an alternative allocation strategy known as Protected Adaptive Asset allocation, based on the Adaptive Asset Allocation model,
with the key difference being having a cash protection component that activates during negative market periods, in other words, when assets show unfavorable momentum they are
replaced by more liquid alternatives; the advantage it has over traditional models such as the MPT is that PAAA can capture short-term dynamics to which investors are also
exposed. “The results show that PAAA outperforms the balanced portfolio in terms of both risk and return and is the best strategy when the universe is well diversified.
When dealing with a less diversified universe, PAAA can be considered to be a valid alternative to other approaches, particularly AAA, in the long run.”
(Bellu & Conversano, 2020). The authors refer to a “well diversified universe” as one of the employed datasets that contain various asset classes: stocks, both national
and international, bonds, commodities and real estate funds. The empirical results show that a diversified portfolio constructed by the PAAA methodology is able to withstand
high volatility periods such as the 2008 crisis, given that it offers a growth rate of 1.08 during the crisis; in other words, an investor would be able to profit even during
very adverse market conditions. This is very important for this thesis because it provides a viable solution to the research problem and it is the reason why this methodology
is used in this paper to construct a portfolio; it is also good to know that this alternative can surpass the original AAA model, as well as an equally weighted portfolio,
however, the authors do not include an optimally weighted portfolio using MPT in their comparison which is something that is done in this thesis. It is worth mentioning that
the paper does not provide explicit information regarding the role of the chosen assets in the performance of the “well diversified universe”, so the reader does not know which
investments are actually having an important contribution; it may be possible to create a superior portfolio by quantifying said impacts. 

According to Bredin, Conlon and Poti (2016), precious metals such as gold, silver and platinum can be used to lower the downside risk of an equity portfolio in exchange of
expected returns; the authors argue that investors are willing to incur this trade-off because the downside risk reduction is greater than the reduction of risk-adjusted
returns. There is a decent amount of literature showing that the asset returns do not follow a normal distribution, which is why the authors do not employ the VaR in its
simplest form to quantify the downside risk, instead, they use what they refer to as a four moment modified VaR, which takes returns, volatilities, kurtosis and skewness as
parameters. “One of the benefits of using modified VaR to assess the risk of a portfolio is the ability to assess the contribution of each distributional moment to overall
portfolio risk and risk reduction…. helps identify the sources of aggregate risk reduction.” (Bredin, Conlon & Poti, 2016). The authors find that gold provides the most
consistent downside risk reduction out of all the three metals, on the other hand, silver and platinum are only effective at this task in the short-term and, according to the
results of this paper, increase the downside risk of a portfolio when considering longer time horizons. These findings are very important because it provides empirical evidence
showing that precious metals can contribute to the reduction of extreme losses. There are possible flaws and/or limitations in this document, the first one being that the
analysis is limited to only three assets from the precious metals category and the authors do not show how the three of them would behave together when included in an equity
portfolio; the second one is about the portfolio construction, asset weights are not optimally allocated and instead they are given certain weights determined by the authors,
for example, 10% of the precious metal in question and 90% of the S&P 500 index. The results found could be influenced by these randomly assigned weights and, when taking into
account how the assets influence one another, it may be possible to find that the three precious metals are actually more consistent and beneficial in the risk reduction of an
investment portfolio. 

##Real Estate
###On the Tracking Performance and Return Deviation of Real Estate ETF´s
In 2006 a financial innovation was made known as leveraged exchange-traded funds (LETF´s) with the purpose of delivering a daily return that is a multiple or inverse multiple 
of the return from the underlying index. Additionally, the use of derivatives such as Futures, Forwards and Swap markets acchieved to cover the short or long exposure in 
the US Market, so in 2007 the development of the real estate derivates began with the same objectives and undertaking this exposures without the need for investors to
buy or sell properties. One of the largest Real Estate ETF´s tracks the Dow Jones Real Estate (DJUSRE), this index belongs to the second group of derivates also known as 
REIT derivatives, the development of this derivates makes the leverage of Real Estate ETF´s possible. According to Boney and Sirmans in 2008, the introduction of real
estate ETF´s on the underlying REIT volatility caused a decrease of the volatility after their introduction. In sum, the indtroduction of the LETF´s provided the investors
a tool so they can be able to leverage their short and long exposures in the real esatate sector, making this a useful strategy when formulating efficient asset allocation. 

#Model
##PAAA
##EWMA


#Contribution
  Through this research, the role of the different asset classes in an investment portfolio will be evaluated and the risk will be managed to improve the optimal 
portfolio allocation to maximize returns and help investors protect their wealth during an economic crisis.

#Scope
  In this research, we will be analyzing the performance of five asset classes using its principal index and a time frame from 2000 to 2020. 
The assets chosen are: Stocks, Commodities, Currencies, Bonds and Real Estate; and the corresponding indexes for each asset class are:
1. S&P 500 Index (Stocks): One of the most important indexes from the United States and it is considered the most representative index of the real market situation.
2. DJCI (Commodities): tracks a range of 28 different commodity futures contracts. 
3. DXY Index (Currencies): measures the value of the United States dollar relative to a group of foreign currencies.
4. DJCBP Index (Bonds): tracks the total market return of high quality bonds of companies from the United States.
5. DJUSRE Index (Real Estate): tracks the performance of the United States real estate investment.

#Epistemological Position
  Epistemology can be branded as the study of the criteria by which the researcher classifies what does and does not constitute the knowledge. (Hallebone, E. & Priest, J. 2009)
  There are several types of epistemological positions including pragmatism, realism, realism, interpretivism, constructivism, and positivism. (Feast et.al, 2010)
  Our research will be conducted under the positivism position, that is only observable phenomena that can provide credible data, facts that are focused on 
causality and law-like generalisations, reducing phenomena to simplest elements. 

#Methodology
##Method
##Techniques



#References/Bibliography
